Workshop to design and build long-running processes in event-based systems (#1)
lailabougria/workshops: designing-event-driven-processes/README.md

# Beyond basic messaging: Designing long-running processes

## Abstract

> Messaging in distributed systems offers a range of valuable benefits: it enables the design of decoupled components, where each component can evolve and scale individually. In addition, messaging improves the system’s fault tolerance but goes even further by opening the door to building self-healing systems. One benefit that doesn’t usually appear in the Googleable list of benefits is one of the most powerful: supporting real-life, long-running business processes and making the system mirror real-world business use cases. And that’s exactly the focus of this workshop.

Reviewer: > but goes even further by opening the door to building self-healing systems

I'm not clear what this means exactly

Author: My thought process was that introducing queues in the middle automatically allows for better fault tolerance, in the sense that you never lose requests. By "goes further by opening the door to self-healing systems", I mean that this can be further leveraged to build self-healing systems by implementing retries, for example, as a self-healing mechanism. 

With that insight, do you have any ideas on why that was unclear from the framing? Do you think I'm making too many assumptions?

> Messaging in distributed systems offers a range of valuable benefits: it enables the design of decoupled components, where each component can evolve and scale individually. In addition, messaging improves the system’s fault tolerance but goes even further by opening the door to building self-healing systems. One benefit that doesn’t usually appear in the Googleable list of benefits is one of the most powerful: supporting real-life, long-running business processes and making the system mirror real-world business use cases. And that’s exactly the focus of this workshop.

Reviewer 2: The way it is stated now reads as if messaging is the only way, and it'll do automagically, to design decoupled and scalable components. What about the following:

I also tried to remove the "but."

``` suggestion
Messaging in distributed systems offers a range of valuable benefits: it enables the design of decoupled components, where each component can evolve and scale independently. In addition to improving the system’s fault tolerance, it opens the door to building self-healing systems. One benefit that doesn’t usually appear in the Googleable list of benefits is one of the most powerful: supporting real-life, long-running business processes and making the system mirror real-world business use cases. And that’s precisely the focus of this workshop.
```

Author: Mm, that's why I added "it enables", to counter the thought that it automagically happens. Funny thing though, I have exactly this point in one of my sessions 🤣 I really like all the other edits, but don't you think keeping the "it enables" is better though?

> If you’ve been exposed to the basic building blocks of messaging and want to understand how to design, build, and test long-running processes in message-based distributed systems, this workshop is for you.

Reviewer 2: This sentence and the title assume the audience knows what "long-running (business) processes" are. In my experience, that is not the case. "long-running" is particularly tricky as it implies a reference to time, and it implies it takes a lot of time. In reality, we know that whatever is "longer" than the span of a single transaction is a good candidate for a saga/workflow/long-running process.

I don't know how to rephrase it, though.

Author: That's one of the first topics I'm planning to start the workshop with. Do you think it's important enough to clarify this in the abstract, as in, because they don't really know what long-running is they won't think this is a good fit for them?

Reviewer 2: The suggestion you made below is a good improvement. I'll go on thinking about it anyway.

Throughout this workshop, you’ll learn:

> - How to identify long-running processes in your domain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- What long-running processes are
- How to identify long-running processes in your domain
```

- Effective techniques to help design complex business processes

> - What orchestration and choreography is, but more importantly, when and why to use each pattern

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- What orchestration and choreography are, but more importantly, when and why to use each pattern
```

- How to deal with actions that occur at different points in time
- How to deal with out-of-order events seamlessly
- How to test workflows and troubleshoot issues where it matters most: in production!

> To get the most out of this workshop, some basic messaging knowledge is expected, including understanding message brokers and messaging patterns like Request-Reply and Publish-Subscribe. Get ready to dive into design exercises in small groups and unlock the secrets of messaging's real-world superpowers!

Reviewer 3: Before I go into a more in-depth review of the wordings etc. I have a more general question: While I was reading through the abstract, which I find generally already quite interesting/good, I was wondering what the target audience is. Is it more for Senior Devs, Lead Engineers, Architects and wannabees? It seems that this sentence hints at mostly design exercises which puts it probably at the level of lead devs, architects and wannabees and not so much at the level of devs. But then when it looked at 

>  build, and test long-running processes
and

> test workflows and troubleshoot issues

seems to be more in the area of devs. So I'm not sure what I should expect from the workshop. Will there be mostly concepts and design exercises or will I see some code and engineering practices or even build some stuff?

Author: I think given the breadth of topics covered, there won't be any hands on coding (remember this is a one day workshop). Rather, there will be design exercises in group, and I will prefer code samples that can be referred to by the audience at a later point. But if I have more time than I know what to do with, these exercises could be done in class. However, I don't expect I'll get to them. If I grow this into a longer workshop, it could include both.

Honestly, I don't believe much in the split between devs and senior devs/architects/lead engineers. I believe any of these roles would benefit from the design exercises.

Reviewer 3: For me it is not about a split but rather about me reading the abstract and not being entire sure what I could/should expect from the current wording because the highlighted parts seemed leave room for interpretation. Now that I better understand I might be able to make some concrete suggestions

Author: That would be great!

> To get the most out of this workshop, some basic messaging knowledge is expected, including understanding message brokers and messaging patterns like Request-Reply and Publish-Subscribe. Get ready to dive into design exercises in small groups and unlock the secrets of messaging's real-world superpowers!

Reviewer: In the context of @danielmarbach comments.

My impression after reading the abstract was that there would be (some) coding involved. If that is not the case maybe that is worth making it more explicit. It would be also good to say that experience in any messaging technology will do.

Author: I believe I'm not being explicit because I want to leave the door open. However, I think you're both right. Maybe I should make explicit that:
- They should mostly expect design exercises in group and no coding during the workshop
- They can expect samples/follow-up coding exercises

If I do it that way, and I end up having more time than I expect, I can always use those artifacts to fill up remaining time.

> To get the most out of this workshop, some basic messaging knowledge is expected, including understanding message brokers and messaging patterns like Request-Reply and Publish-Subscribe. Get ready to dive into design exercises in small groups and unlock the secrets of messaging's real-world superpowers!

Author: ```suggestion
To get the most out of this workshop, basic messaging knowledge is expected due to the limited time available. This includes understanding message brokers (like Azure Service Bus, RabbitMQ, or other broker technologies) and messaging patterns like Request-Reply and Publish-Subscribe. 

Throughout this workshop, we'll dive into different design exercises in small groups, where you'll mostly need pen and paper. Code examples and exercises will be provided as additional material to showcase the use cases discussed during the workshop.

Join me and unlock the secrets of messaging's real-world superpowers!
```

Does this work better? 
Do you believe it makes sense to include the fallacies of distributed computing in the list of prerequisites, or anything else for that matter?

# Beyond basic messaging: Designing long-running processes

## Abstract

Messaging in distributed systems offers a range of valuable benefits: it enables the design of decoupled components, where each component can evolve and scale individually. In addition, messaging improves the system’s fault tolerance but goes even further by opening the door to building self-healing systems. One benefit that doesn’t usually appear in the Googleable list of benefits is one of the most powerful: supporting real-life, long-running business processes and making the system mirror real-world business use cases. And that’s exactly the focus of this workshop.

If you’ve been exposed to the basic building blocks of messaging and want to understand how to design, build, and test long-running processes in message-based distributed systems, this workshop is for you.

Throughout this workshop, you’ll learn:

> - What long-running processes are
> - How to identify long-running processes in your domain

Author: ```suggestion
- (Re)Define what long-running processes are and how to identify them in your domain
```

Maybe collapsing the two works better @mauroservienti

> # Beyond basic messaging: Designing long-running processes

Reviewer 3: Alternative titles:

- Designing long-running business processes with messages
- Designing long-running business processes with messaging
- Designing complex business processes with messaging

or something similar

> # Beyond basic messaging: Designing long-running processes

Author: ```suggestion
# Message Mapping: Designing complex business processes with messaging
```

Reviewer 2: 👎  It pictures "Message Mapping" as a thing, but it's not.

Author: how about "Designing intention-revealing business processes with messaging"

Reviewer 3: that or just "Designing complex business processes with messaging"

> # Beyond basic messaging: Designing long-running processes

Author: ```suggestion
# Designing complex business processes with messaging
```

## Abstract

> Messaging in distributed systems offers a range of valuable benefits: it enables the design of decoupled components, where each component can evolve and scale independently. In addition to improving the system’s fault tolerance, it opens the door to building truly self-healing systems. One benefit that doesn’t usually appear in the Googleable list of benefits is one of the most powerful: supporting real-life, long-running business processes and making the system mirror real-world business use cases. And that’s precisely the focus of this workshop.

Reviewer 3: > One benefit that doesn’t usually appear in the Googleable list of benefits is one of the most powerful

I stumbled over the repetition of benefits and I'm not sure if the googleable thing adds any value. 

After the colon there is also some overuse in my view of "real" which seems forced. Then this paragraph ends with 

> And that’s precisely the focus of this workshop.

which doesn't connect well with 

> If you’re not entirely sure what a long-running process is

Maybe you can land a stronger message by connecting it to the problem you will give me a powerful solution for. Something like

> truly self-healing systems. But it doesn't stop there. The real power comes once you start expressing business processes with intention revealing messages that then in orchestration build up business processes that run longer than just a method call. Your system stops being a mess of meaningless service to service calls and instead shows you what truly matters: your business use cases.
>
> If you've been exposed to the basic building blocks of messaging and want to understand how to design, build, and test message-driven business processes in distributed systems, this workshop is for you.

Not sure if show is the right word but I believe with something like that combined with a variation of the title that moves it towards "complex" you could potentially even avoid talking about long-running if you have to.

Author: I tend to disagree with "I'm not sure if the Googleable
 thing adds any value.". The point is that this doesn't come up as much as it should, to point out there's hidden value that can be exploited. 

Here's a new suggestion based on your feedback:

```suggestion
Messaging in distributed systems offers a range of valuable benefits: it enables the design of decoupled components, where each component can evolve and scale independently. In addition to improving the system’s fault tolerance, it opens the door to building truly self-healing systems. One benefit that doesn’t often appear in the Googleable list of benefits is one of the most powerful: expressing complex business processes with intention-revealing messages (both commands and events) to reflect what's happening in the real world.

These business processes are usually non-trivial and exceed the boundaries of a single method- or service invocation and require us to redefine certain concepts, including time.
```

Reviewer 3: In order to google something you have to already have to be aware of the area you are looking for. That's why I think the term googlable is not adding value.

Author: What I refer to is the benefits of messaging. "The googlable list of benefits"
The idea is that when you google for messaging benefits, you get decoupling, scalability, reliability. You don't often get: expressing complex business processes with intention-revealing messages.

That's how I read it, but your comment shows that's not what you read, is that correct?

Reviewer 3: > What I refer to is the benefits of messaging. "The googlable list of benefits"
The idea is that when you google for messaging benefits, you get decoupling, scalability, reliability. You don't often get: expressing complex business processes with intention-revealing messages.

I'm also reading it that but ask myself when already familiar with messaging

> If you've been exposed to the basic building blocks of messaging

why would I google benefits of messaging and care about whether this benefit is not often mentioned. So I turn it around to think: There is this awesome person who knows a ton about messaging I should probably attend this workshop. Why should I attend? Well because this person shows me something about messaging I have not yet even considered because I'm not yet even aware of having such a problem. 

So in essence the abstract is the source of information not whether something is mentioned on the internet or not.

> If you’re not entirely sure what a long-running process is, or if you've been exposed to the basic building blocks of messaging and want to understand how to design, build, and test long-running processes in message-based distributed systems, this workshop is for you.

Author: ```suggestion
If you've been exposed to the basic building blocks of messaging and want to transition your system from a collection of meaningless and often highly-coupled service-to-service calls to one composed of carefully designed processes that reflect your business use cases, this workshop is for you.
```

Throughout this workshop, you’ll learn:

- (Re)Define what long-running processes are and how to identify them in your domain
- Effective techniques to help design complex business processes
- What orchestration and choreography are, but more importantly, when and why to use each pattern
- How to deal with actions that occur at different points in time
- How to deal with out-of-order events seamlessly

> - How to test workflows and troubleshoot issues where it matters most: in production!

Author: ```suggestion
- How to test long-running processes and troubleshoot issues where it matters most: in production!
```

# Beyond basic messaging: Designing long-running processes

## Abstract

Messaging in distributed systems offers a range of valuable benefits: it enables the design of decoupled components, where each component can evolve and scale independently. In addition to improving the system’s fault tolerance, it opens the door to building self-healing systems. One benefit that doesn’t usually appear in the Googleable list of benefits is one of the most powerful: supporting real-life, long-running business processes and making the system mirror real-world business use cases. And that’s precisely the focus of this workshop.

> If you’ve been exposed to the basic building blocks of messaging and want to understand how to design, build, and test long-running processes in message-based distributed systems, this workshop is for you.

Author: ```suggestion
If you’re not entirely sure what a long-running process is, or if you've been exposed to the basic building blocks of messaging and want to understand how to design, build, and test long-running processes in message-based distributed systems, this workshop is for you.
```
